Add community processes 2.0: (#43)
thegooddocsproject/thegooddocsproject.github.io: proposal-selection.md

---
layout: default
---

> # Proposal selection process

Reviewer: The more I read this, the more I'm convinced that this should be changed to 

# Google Season of Docs proposal selection process

There is a lot of reference to GSoD in this document that is fine if the document isn't trying to masquerade as our own internal project selection process.

Reviewer: I'm happy to let this ride in favour of releasing what is basically an alpha version of the guidelines for us to rapidly iterate on.

This process is used when selecting major initiatives to incorporate into the baseline of The Good Docs Project. In particular, it is used when deciding upon proposals to sponsor.

**Version:** 1.0

**Last updated:** August 2020

## When do we use this process?

This process is initiated periodically and typically depends upon:

*   Timing of current build cycles.
*   Sufficient bandwidth available within the community.
*   Budget availability.

> Timing will typically align with the [Season of Docs](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs) schedule.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean the program itself, or just the time frames for each working phase?
It doesn't make sense (unless I'm missing something) that our project should align proposal work with a completely separate program run by another body. Perhaps the intention with this phrase was more about "We use the SoD as a guide for the different phases of work in a proposal, including how long each might typically run for". Or whatever. And then the URL should probably point to the timeline rather than the home page. No but that won't work because the timeline specifies a date.
I'm tempted to remove this line altogether. If we want proposals to adhere to a certain framework (about timing) then we should create our own and publish that on a separate page.

Reviewer: +1 to removing if this line is trying to suggest that we only sponsor projects through Google Season of Docs.

Reviewer: Happy to record this as an action but let it release as part of the initial alpha cut of the proposal selection guidelines.

Reviewer 3: I feel like GSoD should be a separate from this in some-way as the primary goal for Proposal-Selection should be for our community-contributors and GSoD is the edge-case?

Author: Good feedback. Thanks. As discussed in weekly meetings, I've raised this as an issue to address in a future version of processes. #45 

It was considered that this was not a show-stopper for publishing this version.

## Call for proposals

On initiation of this process, a call for proposals will be sent to public forums, which will at a minimum include our [announce email list](https://thegooddocsproject.groups.io/g/announce). The announcement will include references to:

*   Expectations for proposals.
*   [Prioritization guidelines](prioritization.html).
*   Eligibility.
*   Associated timelines.
*   Budget availability (if applicable).
*   How to submit the proposal.

## Eligibility

*   You should be actively involved in The Good Docs Project or a related community. (Note, involvement in our community is open to all.)
*   You will need to have won the trust of this community in order to have them back your proposal.

> *   You will need a [mentor](roles.html) before you get an application approved.

Reviewer: This isn't technically true in GSoD. You get a mentor *after* you are accepted as a GSoD sponsored participant.

Author: Nice catch. I'm not going to address this now, but have copied this comment into #45 to be addressed as part of GSoD comments.

*   You should fit with the [eligibility criteria of Season of Docs:](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs/docs/faq#what_are_the_eligibility_requirements_for_participation)
    *   You must be at least 18 years of age when you register.
    *   You must be eligible to work in the country you will reside in during the program.
    *   You must reside in a country that is not currently embargoed by the United States. See the [program rules](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs/terms/program-rules) and the [Sanctions Programs and Country Information](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Pages/Programs.aspx) from the US Treasury.

> *   We support diversity and encourage applications and involvement from underrepresented communities.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   We support diversity and encourage applications and involvement from under-represented communities.
```
maybe? :woman_shrugging:

## Implementation process

A variant on the following process should be considered for major initiatives.

**Test the waters:**

> *   Float an idea in our community forums.

Reviewer 3: Does this mean the mailing-list / group?  Was thinking we should track proposals/initiatives of any size/scope inside of Github.  We have the incubator repo, and we could rename that to proposals (or create a proposals).  I feel like potentially community members are in github already, forcing them to join a forum community maybe not the best way to be inclusive.

Author: Yes, forums = mailing list or slack.
Yes, I think we probably should tweak this process, likely making use of the github and the incubator.
I think we should stick with the current text at the moment, and potentially change it in a future iteration.
@mgan59 I suggest that you drive this with a proposal / bug or similar.

*   Look for feedback, interest and engagement. 

> *   If you attract significant community interest and support, and the required effort is more than is likely to be addressed by volunteers, you might consider developing a proposal for sponsored work.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   If you attract significant community interest and support, and the required effort is more than is likely to be addressed by volunteers, develop a proposal for sponsored work.
```

**Prepare proposal:**

*   Develop a proposal in conjunction with the community. Make sure it addresses our project priorities.

> *   Find a trusted mentor from our community who is willing to mentor you.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   Find a trusted member of our community who is willing to mentor you.
```

Reviewer 3: Like this idea, that we should have it apparent in our community who are the Mentors and whether they are open/available.

Author: Yes, good idea. I think any "trusted" community member could become a mentor. You don't need to be mentor first.

*   Share proposal.

**Review proposals:**

*   Community review and discuss proposals.

> *   Community decides if the proposal is worth backing, and locks in if it is.

Reviewer 4: Might need to be more specific about what "locking in" means here.

Reviewer 4: Also: might need to have a dot point here for negotiation/determination of the stipend amount.

Reviewer: > Also: might need to have a dot point here for negotiation/determination of the stipend amount.

Agree, but happy to let this persist as is until Alpha 0.1 is release.

Author: Added a comment in #45 to address there.

**Implementation phase:**

*   The worker works according to the proposed plan.
*   The worker checks in weekly with mentors and other collaborators.
*   Worker provides a weekly status. This can be brief, just a few lines.

**Wrap up:**

*   Write a report, hand over documents and present to the community.
*   Send an announcement to the main mailing and slack #announcements channel.
*   Arrange for a tweet and/or blog post to be created announcing the project completion, linking to the finished work.

## Payment process

> *   Where applicable, guidance on budget will typically be based on the [stipend amounts](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs/docs/tech-writer-stipends) used by Season of Docs (20-30 hours per week x 3 months, or equivalent effort spread over 6 months). This will be referenced from the Request for Proposal.

Reviewer: Again, very GSoD specific here.

Reviewer: Can refine in a later iteration of this initial document.

Author: Tracking as comment in #45

> *   Payment milestones will typically be every 3 months.

Reviewer 3: oh der -- 3 months == quarters

Author: I'll stick with 3 months here. A quarter typically is 3 specific months, so first quarter is (Jan, Feb, Mar), where 3 months could be (Feb, Mar, Apr).

> *   Payments should be correlated to milestones as github tasks. 

Reviewer 4: Does this mean that the payment is recorded in a github issue, or that it's linked to successful closure of a specific issue, or ... ?

Reviewer 3: yeah this is an interesting one... assuming payments are in the open-collective, and question there on getting them connected back to this.

I do think it makes sense for us to create a standard `milestone` concept across all our repos.  I typically organize my `milestones` around Fiscal-Quarters as that is how I do my RoadMap planning.

Author: Tracking this in #45

*   When a milestone is reached:

>     *   The implementor should comment on the milestone task, asking the mentor for review. 

Reviewer 4: lol @ "implementor", I keep reading it something like "dementor" :joy:  Perhaps it would be a good idea to define these roles somewhere? I'm not 100% certain if an implementor is the person doing the work (mentee?) or some other person in the community.

Reviewer: If this is quick to fix then I'm 👍 otherwise leave it for the next iteration of this document IMHO.

Reviewer 3: `contributor` ?

Author: Tracked in #45

    *   The implementor should raise an invoice with our [Open Collective account](https://opencollective.com/thegooddocsproject/expenses/new).
    *   The mentor should review the milestone, and either approve it (by closing the issue) or reject it (by providing feedback on what is still needed to reach the milestone).
    *   If the milestone is approved, the mentor should raise a motion with the  PSC recommending that the payment be approved.
    *   Once approved, a treasurer (not the mentor) should approve the Open Collective invoice, and the mentor updates the decision log with payment approval.

## Project Adjustments

*   Project scope may be adjusted by mutual agreement between the mentor and proposer. 

> *   Scope changes must be approved by the mentor and PSC [decision process](decision.html).

Reviewer 3: ⚠️  broken link should be `decisions.html`

Author: Thanks, fixed.

*   All scope changes must be documented in writing.

## Project completion

> *   Projects are not considered complete until all pull requests associated with the scope of work are merged and any final project report (if part of the original project proposal) has been submitted.

Reviewer 3: My one thought here about this process -- often times work is hard to scope up front, and timelines and deliverables can be hard to nail down in the beginning.  My concern here is we could end up quoting budgets/spending based on a project that isn't easily defined and what was going to take a month takes 3 months.  This results in issues around people wanting paid for work that isn't fully complete due to the `unknowns` of the work.  Might be worth figuring out a process in which we can allocate payments and budgeting around an agile-workflow... happy to discuss more on this.

Author: Good point. Lets take this conversation back into our forums. I don't see it as a blocker for our first release of processes. We can improve in future releases.
